[Music]
Good day. I'm Norman Wildberger, and this is the
second of a series of videos on the foundations
of mathematics. Please have a look at the first
video if you haven't already done so. Last time,
we introduced the most important objects in
mathematics: the natural numbers. We said that
a natural number was just a string of ones, so
the sequence of natural numbers looks just like
this: the first one is one, the next one is
1 1, the next one is 1 1 1, and then 1 1 1 1,
and so on. We also mentioned the standard names
for the first few of them: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, but to
carry on naming them requires the Hindu-Arabic
numeric system, and we don't have that yet. So
it's safer for us to think of a general number
like this as just 1 1 1 1 1 1, a string of
ones. Alright, so let's go back in time, maybe
100,000 years, to a water hole in Africa. We might
imagine a 10-year-old boy there who's been sent
by his tribe to count animals, and he sees a bunch
of buffalo and antelope. Let's say buffalo are
these squares and the antelope are the triangles,
and he's pretty good at counting. He's figured out
a way of counting things. He has a piece of bark,
and on the bark, he makes little scratches, one
for each of the animals that he sees. So for
example, counting buffaloes, here's how he would
do it: there's one, there's one, there's one, one,
one, one, one, one. Of course, he has to make sure
not to repeat. Counting antelopes is the same:
there's one, one, one, one, one, one, one, one,
one. So he goes back to his village with this
piece of bark, and he shows the elders these
marks, and they can sense how many buffalo
and antelopes there are. They may not have a
name for these numbers like we do, but still,
it gives them a very good idea of what's at the
water hole. Now suppose his father asks him,
how many animals are there in total? Why don't
you go back and count them all? Our young boy,
who's rather clever, realizes that he doesn't
have to go back to the water hole to count them
all because he has counted the buffalo and he has
counted the antelope, and he can use the numbers
that he has obtained to find the number of all the
animals. He does that by what we call adding those
two numbers. How do we do that? Well, he just
copies the first one: one, one, one, one, one,
one, one, one, and then he adds the second one:
one, one, one, one, one, one, one, one, one, one.
That then is the total number of animals at the
water hole, and he hasn't had to go back to the
water hole to do it. He's a very clever young boy.
This is an example of the most important operation
in mathematics: the operation of taking the sum
of two numbers. So here's our official definition:
the sum of numbers n and m is a combination of the
strings of ones. By combination, I mean you just
put them together in the obvious way, concatenate
them in computer science language, and we write
that sum as n + m. So our young friend back
in the African savannah 100,000 years ago,
if he kept playing with numbers, let's say he did,
he would probably discover certain facts about
this addition operation, and the main facts are
that it's first of all commutative: n + m is the
same as m + n. Let's illustrate: so here is 5 + 2,
concatenate them, we get this string here. On the
other hand, here's 2 + 5, concatenate them, and
these two numbers are the same. We can get that by
matching them up one by one. Why is it true? Well,
it's almost obvious. If you combine two things,
it doesn't matter in which order you combine them
if you're just interested in the total number. Or
another way of thinking about it is in terms of
inverting them. If we take this pattern here and
flip things over, the total number of ones hasn't
changed, but we've gone from that pattern to this
pattern. That's the commutative law of addition.
Another main law is the associative law, which
concerns three numbers. We agree that addition
is an operation that only takes two numbers and
gives you another number, so if we have three
numbers, there are two possibilities for how to
combine them. We can combine k and n first and
then add that to m, or we can take k and add it
to the sum of n and m. For example, k is 2, n is
3, m is 4. Here is 2 + 3 + 4, so that's 5 + 4,
giving us this string. On the other hand, 2
+ combination 3 + 4 is 2 + this combination,
which gives us this string. And why are these
always the same? If we think of the strings
like this, for example, concatenate the first two
and then concatenate with the third, it gives us
the same as if we concatenate the second and
third and then concatenate with the first. The
resulting configuration is the same. A minor law,
which we'll just mention, is that the successor
operation, which we talked about last time, can
be rewritten now as n + 1. Those are the laws of
addition. Now things get more complicated when we
introduce multiplication. This is a new level of
difficulty. Here's a motivating example: we have
three boxes, say, and in each box, there are four
circles. So there are four circles in a box, and
we have altogether three boxes. We'd like to know
how many circles are there altogether. Well, it's
a matter of combining 4 + 4 + 4, so we think of
this. We're going to write it like this: this is
3 * 4, and that for us means three groups of four.
Or a way of thinking about that is we're going
to replace each of the ones in this first string
with a copy of the second number. So that first
one is replaced by a four, the second one here
is replaced by another four, and the third one is
replaced by another four to give us this resulting
string. So we say that the product of numbers
n and m is the string formed by a copy of m for
every one in n. So the laws for multiplication are
these ones: the commutative law, n * m = m * n;
the associative law, k * (n * m) = (k * n) *
m. Then there are two additional laws called
the distributive laws that connect addition and
multiplication, and they are k * (n + m) is equal
to k * n + k * m. And we introduce an important
notational device: we say that we're going to
allow ourselves to rewrite this expression without
these brackets in the form k * n + k * m. So our
convention is that multiplication takes precedence
over addition. In other words, whenever you see a
multiplication sign, you have to do that first.
And then there's another distributive law in the
other direction: (k + n) * m = k * m + n * m. The
laws on these two pages are the most important
laws in all of mathematics. In fact, they are far
more important than almost anything else. They're
important because they're simple and because their
effect in everyday life is so profound. All of
mathematics uses these laws directly or indirectly
all the time. We need to understand why these laws
are true, and we need to understand it in a way
that doesn't involve any abstract symbolism or
gobbledygook. We need to be able to explain it in
everyday English using only the notation and the
conventions that we've established so far. So I'm
going to leave this as an exercise to you for now,
which we'll talk about in our next video. Right,
but please write out proofs, in other words,
reasons for these laws. I've given you reasons
for the addition laws. For the multiplication
and distributive laws, see if you can write them
out in a way that our 10-year-old friend in the
African savannah 100,000 years ago would
understand. Alright, so we'll talk about
that in our next video. I'm Norman Wildberger. I
hope you join me. Thanks for listening. [Music]
Let me know if you need any further assistance!